Hosting

There are numerous ways to deploy a React app, and the Vite documentation outlines some of the most common.

These notes will focus on the process of using Netlify due to its convenience and the availability of a free-tier plan.
1. Setup redirects

Add a file named _redirects (without any file extension) to the public directory. This file should contain the following redirect rule:

/* /index.html 200

This rule instructs Netlify to serve the index.html page with a 200 status for any request to the base URL. Place this file in the public directory to ensure it is included in the production build of the app by Webpack.
2. Create a production version of the app

Run the following command to compile the code into static files readable by modern browsers:

npm run build

3. Create a Netlify account

Sign up to Netlify. This can be done easily by signing up with GitHub.
4. Install Netfify's CLI

Netlify provides a command line interface (CLI) for performing common operations on their service, such as deploying a site.

To get started, install the CLI with npm:

npm install netlify-cli -g

5. Deploy to a draft URL

Run the following command to deploy a draft version of the site:

netlify deploy

    Authorise Netlify with GitHub, following the prompts in the browser.
    Select the option to Create & configure a new site.
    Provide a site name.
    Select your personal account.
    Provide a deploy path. This needs to point to the build directory and should be ./dist.

The draft version should now be deployed at a URL similar to https://5c13ab16055b9be1725868e6--your-site-name.netlify.com. Verify that it works as expected.
6. Deploy to a production URL

Run the following command to deploy the site to the production URL:

netlify deploy --prod

Specify the build path again. The site will be deployed to the URL: https://your-site-name.netlify.com.
Redeployment

When redploying an app, first create an updated build version of the code:

npm run build

Deploy to a draft URL:

netlify deploy

Deploy to the production URL:

netlify deploy --prod

Other hosting platforms

There are several other platforms that can be used to deploy a React app, including:

    Vercel
    GitHub Pages
    Firebase Hosting
    Render

Learn To Code
