Databases

A database is a digital collection of information stored on a server that can be read, updated and deleted through a database management system (DBMS). Together, the data and the DBMS, along with any associated applications, are referred to as a database system, often shortened to just database.
Relational databases

A relational database is one where data is organised into tables (called "relations") with columns and rows. Each row represents a data entry, or record. Records from one table can be linked to records from another table to form relationships between the data.

    Built from a set of tables (also called relations)
    Data is stored in columns and rows (very structured)
    Tables should contain data about just one type of resource
    Tables must have a primary key column, where each row in a table has its own unique primary key value
    When a primary key is referenced by another table, it is called a foreign key. This connection creates the relationship between the records from multiple tables

Pros of relational databases

    Data is organised and structured. Great for when the "shape" of data is determined and its integrity is important, e.g. finance, retail, or transaction systems.
    Doesn't allow for duplicate data
    Widely used and has a lot of support
    Able to execute complex queries quickly
    Is very secure

Non-relational databases

A non-relational database can be any type of database that doesn't use tables to organise data. e.g. document store and key-value stores (similar to JavaScript objects).

    Less structured data which can be more flexible
    Data can be stored in documents or key-value stores
    Data usually structured like JSON and can even be nested
    Data can typically be queried by a document's unique id or another key-value pair

Pros of non-relational databases

    Better for fluid data, where the requirements for data storage are likely to change
    Can be easier to store and retrieve complex data
    Can scale better than relational databases
    Good for fast application development

Learn To Code
